{{TopMenu}}
{{Menu}}
{{Menu.Development}}
{{OrigLang|<u>L</u>ibre<u>O</u>ffice <u>W</u>eekly <u>N</u>ews #1}}
<!-- As recommended on #mediawiki on Freenode, the following command has beenpreviously used, but should be avoided 
{{DISPLAYTITLE:<u>L</u>ibre<u>O</u>ffice <u>W</u>eekly <u>N</u>ews #2 }} -->
{|
|Author|:
|William Gathoye (wget)
|-
|Publication date|:
|June 14, 2014
|-
|PDF-Version|:
|[https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wget/lown/master/LibreOffice_Weekly_News_0001.pdf available here]
|}

__TOC__== Welcome to this first edition of <u>L</u>ibre<u>O</u>ffice <u>W</u>eekly <u>N</u>ews ==

LibreOffice has plenty of communication channels for its developers andcontributors to exchange messages: mailing lists, social networks, wiki and anask (question/answers) instance. This configuration is not ideal for thedeveloper to see a global overview of the progress made in the LibreOfficedevelopment. Since I subscribed most of the LibreOffice mailing lists andusually take the time to read all messages I receive in my mailbox, and aftera request made by Michael Meeks, I decided to take up this challenge.

Like ''Linux Weekly News'' at its early life, LibreOffice Weekly Newsconsists of a weekly issue gathering interesting development reported indiscussions (mailing lists or IRC), Q/A and git commits made over the pastweek. This summary will emphase on the developer point of view; so do notexpect to have a popularized article, and please do not complain about nerdystuff (if any), since it is written by a computer science student (me) fordevelopers. 

I will publish this summary on the LibreOffice developer mailing list each weekon Sunday nights. In that way, developers not working on LibreOffice during theweek-end can even get the evolution made throughout the weekend. A beta versionof the article will be made available on my github account<ref name=wgetGithub /> onFridays evening. In that way, if someone wants to proofread this writing andapply corrections before the final version released on Sundays, he is more thanwelcome.

This week in LibreOffice...

== GUI ==

The conversion towards the .ui glade dialogs is now continuing (thanks SzymonKłois!) <ref name=gladeUi1 /> <ref name=gladeUi2 /><ref name=gladeUi3 />.

Seems like the new start center is still considered as "unfinished" regardingthe request we have from users. These one are asking for an option to disabledocument thumbnail on the new startscreen<ref name=startCenterHidePreview1 /><ref name=startCenterHidePreview2 />. Maybe thisshould be considered as an easy hack?

As now, we have still no news from the team responsible for the (great!) Sifricon theme. The problem for now is that we have 2 inconsistent repositories forSifr:
* the freedesktop official where all the libreoffice code is hosted* and a Github account created to help people accustomed to use Github, but scared about freedesktop, to get involved more easily.

The initial idea was to merge the Github account into freedesktop. According toan answer late in this week<ref name=sifrGithub1 />, icon designers are usingSparkleShare with Github. SparkleShare is an application acting like DropBoxbut with a commit each time a file is pushed or modified. The GitHub accounthas thus uncompleted work, because it is used like a drive in the cloud. Wehave to handle this issue, by creating 2 branches, keep both repos in sync andgive designers commit right only to the sifr folder on freedesktop.

== Security ==

OpenSSL patches from Fedora have been committed<ref name=opensslPatches /> (CaolánMcNamara) to the libreoffice-4-2 branch. As future branches(<code>libreoffice-4-3</code> and <code>master</code>) are using newer andunaffected OpenSSL version, there was no need to include them.== Code base evolution ==

Since Chrom(e$\vert$ium) dropped the old NPAPI and Firefox is moving away frombrowser extensions<ref name=npapiMozilla />, it was high time for LibreOffice toremove that old code<ref name=removeNpapiPatch /> (thanks Bryan Quigley), not workingin some scenarios<ref name=npapiLibONotWorking />.

There is still a bunch of features that are copied/implemented at differentlocations in the LibreOffice code base. We saw some progress on a copy/pastecode detector tool<ref name=copyPasteDetectorBug />. The tool "CCFinderX core"
available on github under MIT license could suit LibreOfficenicelly<ref name=copyPasteDetectorGithub />.

Access2Base (see <ref name=access2BaseDefinition /> for a definition) is now includedin libreoffice 4.2 and later. In order to keep extension compatibility withother LibreOffice/OO.o forks, Access2Base will be provided as an extension tothem. It was not possible to provide Access2Base as an extension forLibreOffice 4.2 and latter because, LibreOffice is refusing to overrideinternal parts of LibreOffice (this still generates discussions with greatargumentation weighing pros and cons<ref name=coreOverrideArguments />). Thanks tothis patch<ref name=access2BaseOverridePatch /> (Lionel Elie Mamane), it is nowpossible for extensions to override Access2Base.

== Build environment ==

This week, we have seen an initial discussion about reducing build time onWindows by using more native tools.

To be built on Windows, LibreOffice still uses Cygwin. As Cygwin providesa rather great package management, installing dependencies on Windows is quiteeasy<ref name=winBuildDependencies />. So dropping Cygwin in favor of smaller/native tools like GnuWin32 orbusybox is out of scope for now (otherwize this would require the dev ofa one-click tool to install the neededdependencies<ref name=winBuildDependenciesTool /> and maybe reopen thisbug<ref name=winBuildDependenciesInstall />.

Providing upstream patches to 'make' came up during the discussion.

But now, the discussion seems limited to this question: are we gonna replacegmake from a Cygwin-running version to a native-version provided by GnuWin32
which should provide speedup improvement over Cygwin. If it works on Windowstinderbuilds, this could be added as an autodetection option to autogen:
defining MAKE or a GNUMAKE environment variable manually could do the trick. Inthis case there is no need fora synchronization/d-day<ref name=winBuildGmakeReplaceGnuWin32 />.

Cross compilation on Linux with MinGW is rather annoying since it breakcompatibility with ABI and extensions used on Cygwin/VisualC++ builds. And wecan see how this compatibility problem of extensions could becritical<ref name=extensionsCompatibility />.

For a reminder about the differences between Cygwin, GNUWin32 and MSYS, you canread this<ref name=winBuildCygwinMsysGnuWin32Comparison />.

Sometimes we have bug appearing in some languages while most of others have noproblem. Since localization takes much time, it has been disabled ontinderboxes. After a request, thinderbox nb 51 compiling for Windows will nowproduce builds for <code>libreoffice-4-3</code> and <code>master</code> brancheswith the following languages<ref name=localizedBuild />:
* de (as one language with long labels);
* ar (as RTL language);
* ja (as CJK representative); 
* and qtz (keyID-pseudo-language).  

LibreOffice is now buildable on FreeBSDagain<ref name=freeBsdBuild1 /><ref name=freeBsdBuild2 />.

== Unit tests ==

We now have the results (thanks Markus Mohrhard!) of a memcheck run against 20kdocuments that can be used to find nasty problem in futuredevelopment<ref name=memcheckTests />. Two problems have been fixed during theseoperations: (according to a chat with mmeeks) 4x the current speed in Writerwhen trying to open large documents.

<code>
(2014-06-13 15:17:03) ***mmeeks has a 4x speedup for loading large writer fileshe's working on finishing =)
</code>

== Other issues ==

The MySQL/MariaDB connector appears to be broken on OS X. Using homebrew isdiscouraged. ODBC code assumes Unicode char is 2 bytes which iswrong<ref name=sqlConnectorOsx1 /><ref name=sqlConnectorOsx2 />.

An issue stating that Writer doesn't memorize the default printer defined inWindows has been reported. After investigations, it appears this is due to someprinter information which are actually stored in the document itself when thelatter has been saved after it has been printed. If the printer doesn't existany more, the fall back is the default one<ref name=writerPrinter1 />. The printshorcut might use the default WIndows printer<ref name=writerPrinter2 />. But theuser is able to choose if he wants to load the printer settings from thedocument<ref name=writerPrinter3 />.

A new default font for LibreOffice for Arabic?<ref name=arabicFont />

Implement regex for the REPLACE function in Calc to be OpenFormula compliant.
(this could be proposed as an easy hack)<ref name=replaceRegexOpenFormula />.

== GSoC ==

Refactor god objects (Valentin): weekly report -> pushed to masterand <code>IDocumentChartDataProviderAccess</code> has been nearly refactored.

Improve Usability of Personas (Rachit Gupta): the user can select the theme hewants from the gallery and can be applied to the UI.  Needs to be done: run theapplication of the theme in a separate thread to avoid the UI from hanging+ little changes to the UI.

Connection to SharePoint and Microsoft OneDrive (Mihai Varga): all OneDrive isserialized, a file and folder UI representation still needs to be writen. Nowwriting unit tests.

Calc / Impress tiled rendering support (Andrzej Hunt): renamed toLibreOfficeKit. For more details about the current implementation, please read<ref name=tiledRenderingArticle />.

As a reminder, tiled rendering is the ability to be able to paint (render)
a specific part of a document (a tile) to anywhere. This is really useful toplug LibreOffice into various new scenarios where the traditional LO UI cannotbe used (mobile devices,...).

== Hackfests and conferences ==

After the hackfest from Paris (Montreuil) hold on June 27-28th (thanksCharles-H Schultz and Sophie Gautier), Toulouse has been confirmed to holda hackfest on November 15-16th<ref name=hackfestToulouse /> (thanks Arnaud Versini).
More to come at <ref name=hackfestToulouseWiki />.

In 2015 linux.conf.au will be held 12-16 January in Auckland, New Zealand, atthe University of Auckland Business School.  Call for Proposals opened 9 June2014, closes 13 July 2014<ref name=linuxConfAuckland1 />. There will not havea LibreOffice booth during the conference itself, only on the openday<ref name=linuxConfAuckland2 />.

<references>
<ref name=wgetGithub>https://github.com/wget/lown</ref>
<ref name=gladeUi1>https://gerrit.libreoffice.org/9699</ref>
<ref name=gladeUi2>https://gerrit.libreoffice.org/9680</ref>
<ref name=gladeUi3>https://gerrit.libreoffice.org/9726</ref>
<ref name=sifrGithub1>http://listarchives.libreoffice.org/global/design/msg06641.html</ref>
<ref name=startCenterHidePreview1>https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=74834</ref>
<ref name=startCenterHidePreview2>http://listarchives.libreoffice.org/global/design/msg06640.html</ref>
<ref name=npapiMozilla>https://blog.mozilla.org/security/2014/02/28/update-on-plugin-activation/</ref>
<ref name=npapiLibONotWorking>http://lists.freedesktop.org/archives/libreoffice/2014-June/061635.html</ref>
<ref name=removeNpapiPatch>https://gerrit.libreoffice.org/#/c/9644/</ref>
<ref name=copyPasteDetectorBug>https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=39593</ref>
<ref name=copyPasteDetectorGithub>https://github.com/petersenna/ccfinderx-core</ref>
<ref name=access2BaseDefinition>http://www.access2base.com/access2base.html</ref>
<ref name=access2BaseOverridePatch>https://gerrit.libreoffice.org/#/c/9756/</ref>
<ref name=coreOverrideArguments>http://lists.freedesktop.org/archives/libreoffice/2014-June/061795.html</ref>
<ref name=extensionsCompatibility>http://listarchives.libreoffice.org/global/users/msg39416.html</ref>
<ref name=winBuildDependencies>http://lists.freedesktop.org/archives/libreoffice/2014-June/061742.html</ref>
<ref name=winBuildDependenciesTool>http://lists.freedesktop.org/archives/libreoffice/2014-June/061748.html</ref>
<ref name=winBuildDependenciesInstall>https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=32426</ref>
<ref name=winBuildGmakeReplaceGnuWin32>http://lists.freedesktop.org/archives/libreoffice/2014-June/061758.html</ref>
<ref name=winBuildCygwinMsysGnuWin32Comparison>http://stackoverflow.com/a/10712976</ref>
<ref name=localizedBuild>http://lists.freedesktop.org/archives/libreoffice/2014-June/061762.html</ref>
<ref name=freeBsdBuild1>https://gerrit.libreoffice.org/9714</ref>
<ref name=freeBsdBuild2>https://gerrit.libreoffice.org/9722</ref>
<ref name=memcheckTests>http://lists.freedesktop.org/archives/libreoffice/2014-June/061717.html</ref>
<ref name=sqlConnectorOsx1>http://lists.freedesktop.org/archives/libreoffice/2014-June/061700.html</ref>
<ref name=sqlConnectorOsx2>http://lists.freedesktop.org/archives/libreoffice/2014-June/061708.html</ref>
<ref name=writerPrinter1>http://listarchives.libreoffice.org/global/users/msg39393.html</ref>
<ref name=writerPrinter2>http://listarchives.libreoffice.org/global/users/msg39395.html</ref>
<ref name=writerPrinter3>http://listarchives.libreoffice.org/global/users/msg39396.html</ref>
<ref name=arabicFont>http://lists.freedesktop.org/archives/libreoffice/2014-June/061751.html</ref>
<ref name=replaceRegexOpenFormula>http://listarchives.libreoffice.org/global/users/msg39399.html</ref>
<ref name=hackfestToulouse>http://lists.freedesktop.org/archives/libreoffice/2014-June/061694.html</ref>
<ref name=hackfestToulouseWiki>https://wiki.documentfoundation.org/Hackfest/Toulouse2014</ref>
<ref name=linuxConfAuckland1>http://listarchives.libreoffice.org/global/marketing/msg16979.html</ref>
<ref name=linuxConfAuckland2>http://listarchives.libreoffice.org/global/marketing/msg16979.html</ref>
<ref name=opensslPatches>https://gerrit.libreoffice.org/#/c/9713/</ref>
<ref name=tiledRenderingArticle>http://www.ahunt.org/2014/05/tiled-rendering-with-libreofficekit/</ref>
</references>

[[Category:LOWN]]
